\chapter{Preface to the preface}

This ``book'' is not (yet) a book.  It is incomplete,
a works in progress.  But given the lack of headway
I've made, and considering the time and effort I have
already invested, I have come to the conclusion that
it's preferable to publish what I have and worry about
finishing the remainder another time.

Since I began working on this project back in 2011, a
lot has changed in the industry as well as in the
SysAdmin class on which this book is based.  You may
find references or topics to be outdated or seem
quaint (although hopefully not obsolete).  I remain
hopeful that the lessons and examples continue to be
applicable, even if details or specific technologies
may continue to evolve.

As time goes by, I may come back to update chapters
I've previously made available.  As such, this text
may change in content, style, available formats, and
organization.  It is even possible that updates are
already available at \\
\noindent {\tt https://www.netmeister.org/book/} and
since February 2021, some of the content here is also
available in the form of video lectures at \\
\noindent {\tt
https://v.gd/cs615asa}.
In the mean time, I welcome suggestions, corrections,
contributions, criticism, and any and all commentary at \\
\noindent {\tt jschauma@netmeister.org}.  \\

\noindent
Jan Schaumann \\
New York, February 10, 2021

\addvspace{.5in}
\noindent
{\em This draft last updated: \\
\today}
